Learning without neurons
in physical systems
Menachem Stern,1 and Arvind Murugan2
1Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104; email: nachis@sas.upenn.edu
2Department of Physics, University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL 60637; email: amurugan@uchicago.edu
Keywords
physical learning, learning theory, inverse design, metamaterials,
machine learning, self-assembly, molecular computing
Abstract
Learning is traditionally studied in biological or computational systems.
The power of learning frameworks in solving hard inverse-problems pro-
vides an appealing case for the development of ‘physical learning’ in
which physical systems adopt desirable properties on their own with-
out computational design. It was recently realized that large classes of
physical systems can physically learn through local learning rules, au-
tonomously adapting their parameters in response to observed examples
of use. We review recent work in the emerging ﬁeld of physical learn-
ing, describing theoretical and experimental advances in areas ranging
from molecular self-assembly to ﬂow networks and mechanical materi-
als. Physical learning machines provide multiple practical advantages
over computer designed ones, in particular by not requiring an accu-
rate model of the system, and their ability to autonomously adapt to
changing needs over time. As theoretical constructs, physical learning
machines aﬀord a novel perspective on how physical constraints modify
abstract learning theory.
1
arXiv:2206.05831v1  [cond-mat.dis-nn]  12 Jun 2022


1. INTRODUCTION
1.1. Physical learning
When no oﬀ-the-shelf solutions are readily available, systems are often rationally designed
to provide solutions to our everyday problems. Designing such a system is known as solving
an “inverse problem” since one attempts to ﬁnd a system with a desired response to a per-
turbation, in contrast to the “forward problem” of predicting responses of a given system to
perturbations. To solve inverse problems, one must sift through possible systems by varying
design parameters or design degrees of freedom (d.o.f). Solutions are typically sought using
centralized, top-down approaches, where a designer can access and modify the elements of
a system. Numerous computational algorithms have been developed for designing a wide
range of physical systems ranging from materials to robots, including simulated annealing
and genetic algorithms, that typically employ standard computers and may involve physical
prototypes (Fig. 1A). Inverse problems are usually much more diﬃcult to solve compared
to forward prediction problems, in particular because solutions are typically non-unique.
Learning is an established bottom-up framework for solving inverse problems (1) with
speciﬁc advantages. Learning has been explored in the biological context of the brain and
in artiﬁcial neural networks. However, learning is a more broadly applicable framework
in which a system is changed incrementally in a way that enables adoption of a desired
behavior. These incremental changes are deﬁned as a function of the system’s response to
external stimuli. A learning process consists of two major parts: (a) evaluating the system’s
output for a given input, (b) modiﬁcation of the system based on the output. The system
is ﬁrst evaluated by applying stimuli from a training set. Then, the response of the system
to the stimuli drives the modiﬁcation of learning d.o.f, such that subsequent application of
stimuli result in improved responses. This process is usually conducted iteratively until the
system achieves satisfactory performance.
Here, we explore the emerging area of physical learning in materials. Typically, no com-
puters are involved in this approach. Instead, a material is physically subject to examples of
the desired behavior. In response, elements of the material - the learning degrees of freedom
(d.o.f) - change as described by a system-dependent dynamical process called a ‘learning
rule’ (Fig. 1A), underpinning the bottom-up, distributed nature of learning. A physical
learning system thus has the following ingredients:
1. Physical d.o.f s that respond to external stimuli f by adopting a state or dynamic
behavior s(f), a subset of which deﬁnes the desired behavior (i.e., output).
2. Learning d.o.f wi that can modify how the physical d.o.f s(f; {wi}) respond to ex-
ternal stimuli f.
3. A learning rule, dwi = h(s(f; {wi}))dt, that modiﬁes the learning d.o.f wi based on
the response of the physical d.o.f s to the stimuli f.
Here, h is an arbitrary non-linear function.
The quality of learning is evaluated by
whether the system learns the desired behavior, often quantiﬁed by a learning cost function
C(s(f; {wi})). Note that the dynamics of the physical system itself do not compute the
cost function; instead, physical learning seeks to minimize this cost function through the
learning rule and the choice of stimuli used for training.
Broadly, we can divide physical learning into categories based on the amount of user
input during training: 1) Physical unsupervised learning (Fig. 1B), where a physical system
self-adapts to instances of external stimuli with no supervisor intervention, typically by a
2
Stern and Murugan


Input
Output
Input
Output
Input
Output
(A)
Computational design
Iterative design
Computational 
parameter modification
Manufacture
Manual
parameter modification
Computational iteration
Physical learning
Autonomous
parameter
modification
(B)
Directed aging in elastic networks
Hebbian growth of elastic networks
Physical unsupervised Learning
Thumbs up \ down training 
of thin creased sheets
Apply force
folded structure
if folded correctly
otherwise
Contrastive learning in flow networks
Inputs
Ouput
Inputs
Ouput
Free State
Clamped State
Learning rule
Physical supervised Learning
(C)
Spike-timing-dependent plasticity
in memristor networks
Hebbian molecular self-assembly
Figure 1
Physical learning vs computer-aided design (A) Materials are often computationally designed for
particular properties or responses, either entirely on a computer or through an iterative
design-build-test process. In contrast, given external stimuli, in physical learning, materials
autonomously modify their parameters to adopt desired properties or functions. Such autonomous
learning machines modify themselves based on their response to stimuli according to physical
‘learning rules’, which can be classiﬁed by the level of supervision. (B) Physical unsupervised
learning, e.g. Molecular self-assembly with Hebbian-learned interactions (3), Hebbian growth (4)
and directed aging in elastic networks (5) (credit to N. Pashine). (C) Physical supervised learning,
e.g. Thumbs up/down rules in creased sheets (6), contrastive learning in ﬂow networks (7) and
Spike timing dependent plasticity in memristive neural nets, reproduced from (8) (CC BY 4.0).
Hebbian-like process (2), and thereby learns to represent some aspect of these stimuli, 2)
Physical supervised learning (Fig. 1C), where an error signal is provided by a supervisor
comparing the obtained and desired physical outcome, so systems can learn to exhibit
speciﬁc responses for speciﬁc stimuli.
1.2. Why learn using a physical system?
Physical learning blurs the boundary between structure and function; the physical elements
responsible for material properties also perform the task of adapting those material prop-
erties. Such a merger is motivated by both practical and theoretical considerations.
At a practical level, physical learning can lead to a new generation of materials capa-
ble of autonomous learning that oﬀer several advantages over computer design. 1) While
silicon-based computing and learning is incredibly powerful, a physical system that learns
Learning without neurons in physical systems
3


is more appropriate to perform tasks where the inputs and outputs are physical inﬂuences
from or on the environment (e.g., forces, currents, molecule production) rather than sym-
bolic information. 2) In this new framework, physical systems can learn from real examples
of the desired behavior, so that the desired behaviors themselves do not need to be modeled
on a computer. 3) Similarly, a detailed model of the physical system is not needed since the
response of the real physical system, imperfections included, determines physical learning.
In contrast, computer-aided design is only as good as the model of the material and the
model of the desired behavior and environment in which the material will be used. 4) Phys-
ical learning can allow systems to continually learn new behaviors in situ as requirements
change. 5) Physical learning may be appropriate for applications with space, time or energy
constraints or where robustness due to the distributed nature of learning and information
processing (rather than in one electronic processor) is important.
From a theoretical perspective, studying learning in physical systems may shed new
light on the fundamental requirements and limitations of learning in the presence of physi-
cal constraints. How can natural systems evolve the ability to learn? A theory of physical
learning would expand our current modular conception of learning and memory in bio-
logical systems; we often look for control units (e.g., the brain) separable from the parts
being controlled (e.g., the muscle). For example, even in single celled organisms, we tend to
look for a separate gene regulatory or protein interaction circuits that learn and make deci-
sions which are then carried out downstream by, say, physical self-assembly or cytoskeletal
processes (9). But the downstream “muscle” itself can potentially learn and make deci-
sions, as known to be the case in organisms ranging from ciliates to fruit ﬂies and bee
hives (10, 11, 12, 13). Physical learning could reveal the broader scope of such non-modular
learning and information processing available for free in the “muscle” (14).
Finally, this approach can provide a framework to understand atypical disordered sys-
tems and how physical systems explore parameter space to arrive at such atypical points.
While we have made much progress in studying typical disordered systems through ran-
dom ensembles, many examples of disordered systems in nature are highly atypical, e.g.,
due to evolution or other natural processes. Physical learning provides one framework for
such atypical phenomena as the origin of structures and architectures (e.g. hierarchies) in
networks (15) and the prevalent low-dimensionality of physical responses (16, 17).
The framework outlined here also builds upon ideas previously explored in materials
science where materials are subject to some conditions (e.g., compression, temperature
changes) with the goal of internal rearrangements that enhanced desired properties. For
example, metals have been hardened by thermomechanical protocols (18) which reshape
grain size and distribution in a way that improves strength, which in turn is part of a long
tradition of using annealing and ‘hot stamping’ protocols (19). Similar ideas apply to pro-
cessing polymers by which the same polymer mixes can be ‘trained’ to rearrange molecules
with diﬀerent resultant mechanical properties by e.g. diﬀerent extrusion protocols (20).
The framework here goes beyond such processing techniques by expanding the space of
behaviors training can be used for, including supervised learning for input-output responses
and pattern recognition of spatial or temporal correlations in chemical and mechanical
stimuli. The framework also signiﬁcantly expands the range of learning mechanisms be-
yond molecular rearrangements to include growth and degradation, and active learning
of molecular interactions. Many of the advances here are a conceptual synthesis between
ideas in materials processing and ideas of learning in computer science. A closely related
development is the idea of memory in materials (21), discussed later.
4
Stern and Murugan


1.3. Challenge and opportunity: local learning rules
Machine learning algorithms implemented on a computer typically compute a cost function
C({wi}), a global quantity that reﬂects performance on a task at hand, and strives to
minimize it, e.g., through gradient descent,
dwi
dt ∼−∇wiC({wj})
(Non −local gradient descent).
1.
Gradient descent procedures are eﬃciently implemented on computers (especially
GPUs), e.g. in artiﬁcial neural networks through back-propagation (22). Note that such a
process is highly non-local when wi are interpreted as parts of a physical system: the change
dwi in a given element wi depends in principle on the entire neural network, including e.g.,
how a ‘distant’ neuron responded to stimuli.
Such highly non-local changes cannot be realized in physical learning without eﬀectively
mimicking a computer algorithm with physical components. Instead, we seek to understand
to what extent physical systems can learn by exploiting typically local natural processes
without any explicit cost function,
dw[x, t]
dt
∼h(s(f; {w})[x, t])
(Local learning rule).
2.
Here, the change in a learning degree of freedom w[x, t] located at a point x, t in the
physical system is restricted to change only based on the state s[x, t] of the system at the
same (or close vicinity) spacetime point (Here, h is an arbitrary local function).
Note
however, that the local state s(f; {w})[x, t] will generically depend on a stimulus f and
learning d.o.f {w} of the entire system at distant points because of collective dynamics of
the physical system; e.g., the way an elastic material deforms at point x due to a force f
can depend on force components f(y) and on material properties at distant points y.
Thus, there is no explicit cost function or global optimization involved in local rules in
Eq. 2. However, if the local learning rule h and stimuli f are chosen correctly, the system
can nevertheless minimize a cost function as the collective physical dynamics during the
response to stimuli can encode global information in the local state s(f, {w})[x, t].
Physical systems are in principle more constrained in their learning abilities than an in
silico neural network (23). However, conceptually similar constraints also distinguish the
brain from artiﬁcial neural networks; learning in the former is often constrained by locality
(e.g., Hebb’s rule (2) or Spike-Timing-Dependent Plasticity, STDP (24)).
Nevertheless,
biologically plausible learning rules, simulated on computers, have proven successful (25),
suggesting that physical learning has potential despite locality constraints (26). Further,
locality provides beneﬁts as well, since learning can be desynchronous, more robust and
scale better with system size since it does not rely on a central processor (27, 28).
1.4. Relationship to machine learning, neuromorphic computing and physical
computation
There have been many threads of work related to physical learning over the previous years.
The ﬁeld of neuromorphic computation (29, 30) is closely related to physical learning in
that physical elements are modiﬁed so that the system adopts a desired computational
ability. However, neuromorphic computers are often considered for a distinct objective - to
compete with in silico machine learning (ML) in its domain of symbolic inputs and outputs.
The physical learning machines explored here can deal with problems where the inputs and
Learning without neurons in physical systems
5


outputs are physical (e.g., forces, molecular assemblies). Neuromorphic computing and in
silico ML algorithms do not directly compete in this realm since they require translation
of stimuli to electronic or other symbolic inputs.
More saliently, these methods cannot
directly display any physical output such as a elastic response or a self-assembled molecular
structure in response to a stimulus.
The ﬁelds of physical computation (31) and molecular computation (32, 33) explore how
to implement ﬁxed computations with physical systems. The systems explored here build on
these prior works by autonomously learning what computation (or more generally, physical
behavior) needs to be carried out in the ﬁrst place by physically experiencing examples of
the desired behavior. Another closely related physical computation framework is the ﬁeld
of reservoir computing (34). Reservoir computing uses physical systems with such complex
internal dynamics that no physical elements need to change during a learning process;
instead, learning how to interface with a ﬁxed physical system can eﬀectively deﬁne inputs
and outputs in a way that solves inverse problems. This interface can be learned using a
computer as an output ﬁlter (35).
In this review, we strive to showcase recent experimental and theoretical advances in
the emerging ﬁeld of physical learning. The remainder of the review is organized as follows:
In section 2, we feature examples of physical learning machines, emphasizing ways of ex-
perimentally realizing physical learning. In section 3, we discuss the physically realizable
learning rules powering learning machines, subdivided into unsupervised and supervised
learning rules.
In section 4, we describe practical aspects inherent to realizing learning
machines in experiments. In section 5 we highlight some theoretical learning concepts and
how they manifest in the framework of physical learning. Finally, section 6 focuses on how
the physical properties of a system are modiﬁed as it undergoes physical learning.
2. EXAMPLES OF PHYSICAL LEARNING MACHINES
2.1. Elastic materials: networks and sheets
Disordered elastic media and their abstractions, ranging from spring networks to creased
sheets, have received much interest for their potential to mechanically respond in non-
standard, desired ways (36, 37, 38). Recent works have explored the feasibility of physically
learned behaviors in these systems (4, 5, 39, 40, 41). Here, the learning d.o.f wi generally
involve either bond lengths or bond stiﬀnesses in elastic networks and crease stiﬀnesses in
creased sheets. For example, auxetic materials (negative Poisson’s ratio, Fig. 1B, right)
were trained by imposing the desired global deformation (the stimulus f) on a material
(Fig. 2A), which leads to a pattern of local strain across the material (the response s(f)).
A learning process, typical of these works, involves bond stiﬀnesses wi that change according
to the strain in that bond (i.e., locally) according to rules such as dwi
dt ∼−(straini)2.
Physical learning can also train non-linear features like bifurcated folding pathways
in mechanical systems (Fig. 1C, left). Origami and Kirigami sheets with disordered crease
patterns have rich folding topologies (42), starting from 2d ﬂat sheets with creases and slits,
and ending with various folded shapes in response to given force patterns. While the crease
geometry is usually ﬁxed by fabrication, the bending stiﬀness of creases can serve as learning
d.o.f wi and may change in response to folding strain. Theory and simulations have shown
that folding pathways of such sheets can be trained for speciﬁc topologies with applications
to dynamical control of folding
(43), mitigation of misfolding pathways (44) and even
classiﬁcation of mechanical force patterns, analogous to neural networks (6) (Fig. 2B).
6
Stern and Murugan


2.2. Molecular systems and active matter
Molecular systems with speciﬁc interactions show behaviors that deﬁne the complexity of
life, ranging from computation and neural network-like information processing (32, 45, 46,
47) to structural behaviors like self-assembly of complex and dynamic structures, targeted
phase separation and active matter (48, 49, 50). While most work tends to assume ﬁxed
interactions, several works have explored ways of treating molecular interactions as learning
d.o.f wi and thus learning complex molecular behaviors.
One broad learning mechanism involves creating new molecular species through lig-
ation or polymerization (51, 52) or by preferential multiplication of molecules that bind
input molecules tightly and discarding of those who do not bind (53, 54) (Fig. 2C).
These new species then mediate new interactions wi contingent on the history of the sys-
tem (55, 56). One recent example (3, 57) explores learning interactions needed for self-
assembly using a Hebbian-inspired ‘localized together, wired together’ rule (Fig. 1B, left):
dwij/dt = si(x, t)sj(x, t) where si(x, t) is the concentration of species i at x, t and wij is the
interaction strength between species i, j. That is, species i, j whose concentrations are high
in the same place and time start interacting more strongly. The collective nucleation dy-
namics in such a system has been shown to be capable of pattern recognition by assembling
diﬀerent structures in response to diﬀerent concentration patterns (57), with mathematical
connections to Hopﬁeld’s associative memory (58).
Similar ideas of learning in multi-component phase separation
(59, 60), e,g., based
on DNA nanostars (49), are likely to be realized in the coming years. All of these works
suggest that inevitable physical processes (46) such as self-assembly, phase separation and
nucleation can enable learning and perform pattern recognition, despite not being set up
to mimic a neural network element by element (57) as in circuit approaches.
Another important type of molecular learning involves growth. Molecular systems like
hydrogels and DNA nanotubes can grow elements based on their current geometry (61, 62)
and can potentially continually learn multi-stability (4). Some molecular systems such as
crystals with defects are capable of rudimentary evolution through repeated fracture and
growth; this aspect raises the intriguing possibility of learning through evolution in non-
biological systems (63).
Learning in well-mixed molecular circuits (as opposed to the structural processes above)
has a larger literature, ranging from bio-inspired associative learning (64) to recent progress
towards molecular neural networks (65, 47). Molecular systems can also exploit their in-
trinsic stochasticity needed e.g., for Boltzmann machines (66).
Active systems (e.g. self-propelled particles) can expend energy and perform actions
on microscopic scales. Such systems are potentially capable of learning either by combin-
ing synthetic active matter with DNA-based elements (67) and through rearrangement of
nematic or polar ﬁlaments as in natural systems such as the cytoskeleton (68, 69). Re-
lated ideas have been explored through simulations (70, 71, 72), though truly autonomous
learning has yet to be demonstrated on the molecular scale. Autonomous learning can be
realized more readily in macroscopic robotic swarms (73, 74) that demonstrate similar ac-
tive matter phenomena. Similarly, tissue-level rearrangements through active adhesion and
junction changes might also allow for training (75).
Learning without neurons in physical systems
7


force pattern
(A)
(B)
(D)
(C)
(E)
(F)
(G)
Figure 2
Examples of experimentally realized physical learning machines. (A) Elastic network, aged under
stress, adapts non-generic auxetic responses, reproduced from (5) (CC BY 4.0). (B) Self-folding
origami sheets trained to fold into desired shape in response to an input force pattern. (C)
DNA-based molecular learning for handwritten digit classiﬁcation, reproduced from (54) (CC BY
4.0). (D) Pinned P. polycephalum network changes its structure to memorize locations of food
sources, reproduced from (76) (Published under PNAS license). (E) Optical diﬀractive neural
network constructed to classify digits and fashion products, from (77). Reprinted with permission
from AAAS. (F) Electric circuit with variable resistors performs supervised learning and is robust
to damage to individual elements (28). (G) Mechanical, electronic and optical networks trained to
classify handwritten digits using Physics-aware-training, reproduced from (78) (CC BY 4.0).
2.3. Flow networks
In both biological (e.g. vascular) and engineered (e.g. microﬂuidic) networks, transport of
materials is often achieved via ﬂuid ﬂow. Properties of pipes in a ﬂow network, such as
their radii, conductance or capacitance, determine the network’s ability to globally trans-
port material from one point to another. While such optimization could be carried out
on a computer, many natural systems appear to adjust individual elements based on lo-
cal feedback. For example, ﬂow might couple to the mechanical properties of the pipes,
constricting or expanding them to control ﬂow conductance and pipe capacitance locally.
Such adaptation might allow the network to control the distribution of cargo. For example,
8
Stern and Murugan


in Physarum polycephalum, the thickness of tubes controls the shape of the organism and
allows it to move, forage and memorize features of its surrounding (11, 76, 79) (Fig. 2D).
Similarly, adaptive processes in other natural ﬂow networks such as those in leaves and
vasculature (80, 81) are thought to work through local rules, as there is no central controller.
Theoretical work on such ﬂow networks has explored the ability to learn diﬀerent behaviors
through local rules (Fig. 1C, right), including ML-like classiﬁcation of stimuli (7, 82).
2.4. Neuromorphic computing
A related but distinct thread of research is neuromorphic computation, which typically use
solid state, electronic or optical elements to construct networks, inspired by neuronal or
computational learning (29, 30). Promising implementations include crossbar arrays (83),
spintronic tunnel junctions (84) and phase change materials (PCMs) in photonic systems
(Fig. 2E). In these systems, elements might adapt their resistance (e.g., memristors, poten-
tiometers) as part of learning.
While past neuromorphic systems tried to implement non-local gradient descent (85)
or biological learning rules (86) using complex elements, a new generation of neuromorphic
implement simpler local learning rules based on contrastive learning (87, 88), allowing for
regression and classiﬁcation (27, 28) (Fig. 2F). Neuromorphic computing seeks to compete
in traditional machine learning (ML) domain on energy and robustness (89, 90). In contrast,
the spirit of this review is to explore learning as a metaphor for how the response of atypical
disordered physical systems to physical stimuli can change in functional ways; we do not
seek to solve problems in the traditional ML domain with physical systems.
A recent new approach goes beyond engineered neural network-like architectures, taking
the power of backpropagation to exploit the dynamics of complex physical systems. In this
approach (78), physical parameters of a mechanical, electronic or optical system are up-
dated by a backpropagation algorithm that observes the response of the system to physical
stimuli. Such training eﬀectively creates ‘deep physical networks’, i.e., physical systems, ca-
pable of solving classiﬁcation problems (Fig. 2G). Computer-aided backpropagation in (78)
is not a focus of this review; we focus on training that is potentially implementable through
local rules in situ by physical dynamics, instead of computer-aided backpropagation.
On the other hand, there are similarities. The goal of the molecular and mechanical
systems reviewed here and the approach of (78) is to exploit the intrinsic dynamics of
physical systems for learning and computation on physical stimuli, rather than force physical
systems to mimic neural network architectures element by element.
2.5. Reservoir computing: Training computational interfaces
Physical computation approaches often use a physical system as a computational resource,
and opt to only train an interface with that system. In reservoir computing, a complex
dynamical network takes an external input and perform a generic high dimensional ‘com-
putation’.
A ﬁlter is then trained using a computer on the output of the system, such
that a desired result is obtained (34). Diﬀerent types of physical systems were used in this
way, including electronic, ﬂuidic, mechanical and biological systems, for a broad range of
regression and classiﬁcation problems.
Learning without neurons in physical systems
9


3. PHYSICAL LEARNING RULES
In learning theory, learning problems are typically divided into conceptually distinct classes,
unsupervised and supervised learning. A similar distinction is worth making in the mate-
rials context since the classes correspond to potentially diﬀerent applications with diﬀerent
physical training protocols.
3.1. Unsupervised learning
In unsupervised learning, the learning degrees of freedom are modiﬁed directly as a response
to observed signals. A completely unsupervised physical learning rule is of the form,
dwi
dt = h(s(f; {wj}))
(Unsupervised learning),
3.
where s(f; {wj}) is the conﬁguration the system adopts in response to an external
stimulus f, assuming material parameters {wj}.
h is an arbitrary non-linear function.
Here, learning d.o.f wi adjust themselves based on the response s(f; {wj}). A paradigmatic
example of such learning is directed aging in elastic systems. For example, elastic networks
have been trained to be auxetic (5) by holding materials in the auxetic conﬁguration as
strained bonds soften according to a learning rule (Eq. 3). In this case, aging reduces the
energy of a system held at its desired state dwi
dt ∼−
∂
∂wi E(˜s; wi), where E(˜s) is the energy
of a desired state ˜s. Note that as the energy of elastic networks is a sum over individual
bonds i, this is a local rule, where every bond i changes according to the stress (energy)
it carries. Similarly, at the molecular scale, stabilizing elements can grow between parts
of a material that stabilize conﬁgurations the material is held in. For example, learning
rules have been demonstrated experimentally in hydrogels using polymerases (61) and DNA
nanotubes (62, 91) (Fig. 3A) and theoretically modeled in (4) to continually store multiple
conﬁgurations in one mechanical system, without overriding previous ones, and retrieve
conﬁgurations based on partial prompts.
Unsupervised learning can create new molecular interactions (Fig. 3B). For example,
proximity-based ligation (51, 52) can create interaction mediating molecules for species i, j
by creating a ligated i−j molecule; further, ligation is naturally localized in space and time
by mass-action kinetics, resulting in a Hebbian-like learning rule:
dwij
dt
∼si(x, t)sj(x, t)
(Molecular Hebbian learning),
4.
where wij is the interaction strength between molecular species i and j with concentrations
si(x, y), sj(x, t). Thus, spatial and temporal proximity during learning leads to changes in
stronger or weaker binding interaction between diﬀerent species of molecules. Equivalent
mechanisms include activation of inactive particles e.g., through strand displacement (51)
or phosphorylation. Such learning was shown to allow
(3, 57, 94) learning multiple self-
assembly behaviors and recognize patterns through nucleation (see Fig.4D).
Adaptation in ﬂow networks have also been modeled (11, 81) with unsupervised rules
that only depend on the ﬂow through edges, proportional to a pressure drop sj −sk:
dwij
dt
∼h(si −sj)
(Flux −based rule),
5.
where wij is the conductance of an edge connecting nodes i and j. In P. polycephalum, the
stimulus f might correspond to food sources. Edges that exhibit low eﬀective conductance
are pruned, as observed in simulations and experiments (11) (Fig. 3C).
10
Stern and Murugan


(A)
faces
(acrylic)
crease
reduced stiffness
(wet) epoxy
fold
fold
epoxy lost
epoxy lost
height h
width w
training 
(fold and extrude epoxy)
trained vertex
(epoxy is set)
Unsupervised learning rules
(B)
(C)
Supervised learning rules
(D)
(E)
(F)
(G)
(H)
(I)
Impose Inputs
Measure
Outputs
Free Network
ΔRi ={
+ δR if | ΔVC
i | > | ΔVF
i |
−δR otherwise.
+ δR
−δR
Update Both Resistors Network 
Impose 
Outputs
Clamped Network
Impose Inputs
VF
VC
Ri
Activation
Activation
Figure 3
Local unsupervised and supervised learning rules in various physical substrates. (A) DNA
nanotubes self-assemble to reinforce connections between ‘seeds’ based their spatial proximity.
Adapted with permission from (91). Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (B) Creation of
interaction-mediating molecules based on spatio-temporal proximity of other molecular species;
adapted from (51) (CC BY 4.0). (C) P. polycephalum adapts the radius of vascular tubes
according the local ﬂow shear stress (11) (credit K. Alim). (D) Epoxy-ﬁlled creases in sheets
extrude epoxy in response to folding strain during the epoxy setting (i.e., training) period;
consequently, ﬁnal crease stiﬀnesses about the ﬂat state depend on history of folding. (E) Buﬀered
DNA strand displacement circuit feeds back into the concentration of reactants to implement
gradient descent in supervised learning. Adapted with permission from (65). Copyright 2016
American Chemical Society. (F) Two coupled electronic circuits, a free and a clamped network,
that change the resistance of variable resistors in response to local voltage drops (27). (G) Local
contrastive learning applied manually by pruning bonds in experimental photoelastic networks
with visual stress measurements. Reprinted ﬁgure with permission from (92). Copyright (2021) by
the American Physical Society. (H) A spiking electronic circuit implementing the Equilibrium
propagation learning rule to modify network synaptic weights according to temporal spiking
patterns, reproduced from (88) (CC BY 4.0). (I) Optical transmissivity of elements in an optical
neural network changes according to STDP, by feeding back optical signals into waveguides with
phase change materials, reproduced from (93) (CC BY 4.0).
Learning without neurons in physical systems
11


3.2. Supervised learning
In machine learning (ML), supervised learning involves labeled training examples, e.g.,
labeled images of cats and dogs. In the context of physical learning, supervised learning
corresponds to training a material to show desired speciﬁc responses for all input stimuli
f. A typical supervised learning task is classiﬁcation (e.g. the Iris dataset (95)), where
a system is trained to produce a speciﬁc response sA(f) for all stimuli f ∈FA in class
FA and a diﬀerent response sB(f) for stimuli f ∈FB in class FB. Here, FA and FB are
user-speciﬁed sets of stimuli and the challenge is two-fold: the physical learning process
must identify correlations or features that separate the stimuli in FA and FB and further,
must result in a material that responds only to these features in a speciﬁed way (Fig. 4A).
As in ML, one can evaluate learning performance by a cost function C({wi}) that is
a measure of the number of stimuli f for which the system (with given {wi}) evokes an
incorrect response. Then, the goal of physical supervised learning is for the material to
naturally adapt wi such that the cost function C is minimized.
To achieve such a goal in physical systems, one needs a ‘supervisor’ who makes the
learning process contingent in some way on the response s(f) to stimuli f being ‘right’ or
‘wrong’ (as deﬁned by the cost function).
The simplest form of such supervision is a ‘thumbs up/thumbs down’ feedback in which
the supervisor only decides the sign of the autonomous unsupervised rules described earlier:
dwi
dt =

−h(s(f; {wi}))
if s(f) is correct
+h(s(f; {wi}))
otherwise
(Thumbs up/Thumbs down rule)
6.
Such a rule was shown to be powerful enough to learn and classify subtle force correla-
tions applied to disordered mechanical systems (6). In this theoretical study, spatial force
patterns belonging to one of two sets FA, FB are applied to a disordered creased sheet; a
supervisor decides whether the sheet is folded into a desired structure sA or sB for stimuli
in FA or FB respectively. If the folded structure is correct for the stimuli, the supervisor
lets creases soften according to their strain, say, by immersing the folded structure in one
chemical environment. Otherwise, the supervisor immerses the folded structure in a diﬀer-
ent environment that stiﬀens creases based on strain. A simpliﬁed version of this local rule
was realized by letting a liquid glue ﬂow out of creases that signiﬁcantly fold in a desired
conﬁguration in creased sheets (Fig. 3D).
Similar supervised rules can be implemented in molecular systems, e.g., by controlled
strand displacement (65) (Fig. 3E). Through such mechanisms, e.g., the unsupervised molec-
ular Hebbian learning rule in Eq. 4 can be modiﬁed so that interactions between co-localized
molecules are either strengthened or weakened depending on the judgement of a supervisor.
3.2.1. Contrastive learning. A more powerful supervised learning framework, requiring
greater supervision but promising better results, is inspired by contrastive Hebbian learn-
ing (96). In contrastive learning, a system is trained by observing the contrast between its
current responses to an input s(f) and a nudged ‘improved’ response ˆs(f). This nudging
takes the form of additional (weak) forces or constraints, applied by the supervisor on the
system, such that it better represents the desired conﬁguration (lowering the cost function).
For physical systems that are deﬁned by an energy function E(s; wi), a simple contrastive
learning rule takes the form
12
Stern and Murugan


(A)
2
3
4
Sepal width
5
6
7
8
Sepal length
4
6
Petal length
2
3
Sepal width
1
1.5
2
Petal width
3
4
5
6
Petal length
I. Virginica
I. Versicolor
2
3
4
Sepal width
5
6
7
8
Sepal length
4
6
Petal length
2
3
Sepal width
1
1.5
2
Petal width
3
4
5
6
Petal length
I. Virginica
I. Versicolor
Forces
Untrained sheet
homogeneous
 stiffness
heterogeneous
stiffness
Trained sheet
0
5
10
15
20
Epoch
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Accuracy
Training
Test
Folding
Folding
Forces
0 1 2 3 4 5
Sepal Length (V)
0
1
2
3
4
5
Petal Width (V)
Step 1
83%
Step 50
93%
0 1 2 3 4 5
Sepal Length (V)
0
1
2
3
4
5
Petal Width (V)
Step 300
97%
Errors
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Training Steps
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
1 Epoch
Training Steps
Sepal Length (V)
(B)
(C)
Untrained network
Trained network
(D)
concentration input
self-assembled output
Figure 4
Training physical learning machines for machine learning inspired tasks by mapping complex
datasets to physical stimuli. (A) Data from the Iris ﬂowers (95) dataset is mapped to physical
stimuli (here, force patterns) that are then used to train a creased thin sheet to show distinct
responses for distinct classes of stimuli. Here, the sheet adopts a heterogeneous crease stiﬀness
proﬁle through a local learning rule, and eventually correctly classiﬁes the input stimuli through
folding responses (6). (B,C) Similar classiﬁcations be learned in ﬂow and electric networks by
mapping the Iris data to input pressures or voltages at some nodes, and reading out the pressures
or voltages at some other output nodes, in (B) simulations and (C) experiments (27). (D)
2500-pixel images were mapped to concentration patterns of 2500 molecular species (grayscale
value of pixel i = molecular concentration ai). Molecular interactions were trained by a Hebbian
rule, so the molecular system classiﬁes diﬀerent (potentially distorted) stimuli by showing diﬀerent
self-assembly behaviors in the non-equilibrium nucleation-dominated regime of self-assembly (57).
dwi
dt ∼
∂
∂wi [E(s(f)) −E(ˆs(f))]
(Contrastive learning).
7.
While this approach is frequently used to train computational models (e.g. restricted
Boltzmann machines (97)), it was shown to give rise to local, physically realizable learn-
ing rules (98, 25). Furthermore, in certain limits contrastive learning well approximates
the gradient of a global cost function (99), suggesting that physical local learning is not
fundamentally limited in performance compared to global computational ML. Contrastive
learning and its derivative approaches were shown to successfully train (in-silico) various
physical models, including Hopﬁeld nets (99), ﬂow networks (87, 100) (Fig. 4B), mechanical
spring networks (7), cell assemblies and photonic neural networks (101). Early experimental
systems implementing contrastive learning in linear resistor and elastic networks (Fig. 3F,G)
demonstrated the success of this approach (92, 27, 28), e.g. in classifying the Iris dataset
(Fig. 4C). These experiments further hint at the potential scalability of physical contrastive
learning to large networks and complex sets of tasks.
A plausible generalization to systems without an energy function (i.e. non-symmetric
dynamical systems) but still at steady state is given by spike-timing-dependent-plasticity
(STDP (24))
(102):
dwij
dt
∼h(sj) ˙si where wij is the strength of a ‘synapse’ (coupling)
connecting ‘neurons’ j to i, and h(·) a non-linear function. This learning rule was shown
Learning without neurons in physical systems
13


computationally to enable learning in non-symmetric spiking recurrent neural networks
(Fig. 3H) by continuously evaluating the activations of ‘pre-synaptic’ and ‘post-synaptic’
nodes (88). Such rules have been implemented in physical memristive substrates (103, 104);
e.g., optical transmissivity of chalcogenide phase change materials (PCM) changes as a
function of the number of pulses applied to, aﬀording an approximate implementation of
STDP in optical synapses (93) (Fig. 3I).
4. CHALLENGES IN IMPLEMENTING PHYSICAL LEARNING
4.1. Physical implementation of supervision
The principal diﬃculty in realizing physical learning machines is the requirement that the
underlying physics allows for a useful local learning rule.
Many unsupervised rules explored here may be implemented by inevitable processes
in natural systems.
For example, directed aging in elastic systems (5, 39, 40) exploits
inevitable aging processes in many materials. Similarly, growth-based rules in molecular
systems naturally follow local geometry (4) while ﬂow networks in many natural systems can
expand or constrict according to local ﬂow properties (11). Proximity-based ligation (51)
allows for molecular interactions to increase based on spatial or temporal proximity, e.g.,
enabling learning of self-assembly behaviors by simply co-localizing particles in the desired
arrangement during a training period (3, 94).
Supervised learning places greater demands on the material since it requires the same
physical system to employ a learning rule with either sign, e.g., strengthening or weaken-
ing interactions, depending on context. For example, thumbs-up-thumbs-down supervised
learning in creased sheets (6) required the same elastic material to be capable of stiﬀening
(thumbs down) or softening (thumbs up) due to strain, based on a thumbs-up-or-down ‘sig-
nal’ from the supervisor. Such sign switching might be achieved by the supervisor placing
the system in diﬀerent chemical environments (or at diﬀerent temperatures (5)) based on
whether the system shows the right or wrong response to the a stimulus.
Greater supervision like contrastive rules require more to realize their promise: in addi-
tion to the sign problem, contrastive rules require two copies of the system and the ability
to change learning d.o.f wi based on the quantitative diﬀerence between the systems. While
such duplication might be possible in some cases (27), a more broadly relevant implementa-
tion could apply the free and clamped conditions sequentially (99), if learning elements have
a memory component. Another implementation might involve physical signals of multiple
modalities to obtain the contrastive signal; e.g., in ﬂow networks, tracer particles could be
injected at the output and advected by the ﬂow, carrying the error signal information to
the learning d.o.f (82). Finally, approximations of idealized theoretical learning rules might
suﬃce in real materials; e.g., correctly getting just the sign of change in wi based on change
in energy might be suﬃcient for contrastive learning wi (27, 105).
4.2. Locality in solid and liquid-like systems
While physical learning rules need to be local, the nature of the locality requirement varies
across systems.
Solid-like systems, e.g., elastic networks and sheets and ﬂow networks,
typically have ﬁxed neighborhood geometry. Each learning element wi has a ﬁxed location
in space and time x, t and locality implies that wi can only change based on the state of
the system s[x, t] in the vicinity.
14
Stern and Murugan


Liquid-like systems, like molecular systems, have no ﬁxed neighbors in space, since
components typically diﬀuse freely like in molecular systems or re-arrange in a more limited
manner as in jammed packings (41). While training might seem diﬃcult in such liquid-like
systems without ﬁxed neighbors, there are two ways forward. In molecular systems with
many species of components (59, 60, 106), the learning d.o.f wij are interactions Jij between
species i, j. The locality constraint dictates that Jij only change based on transient spatial
or temporal coincidences of molecules i, j as in Eq. 4, e.g., as considered in proximity-based
ligation and in Hebbian learning of self-assembly (3, 57). Note that the resulting learned
interaction graph, encoded by Jij, has no real-space interpretation and does not need to be
embeddable in 3 dimensions.
A distinct challenge arises in liquid-like systems with only a few species or components,
such as jammed sphere packings and actin or microtubule networks. Here, training often
relies on the geometric arrangements, e.g., memories stored in cytoskeletal networks under
shear (41, 69).
The further extension of learning protocols to such liquid-like systems
without ﬁxed neighbors is important to broaden the scope of physical learning to all scales.
4.3. Exploiting noise
Compared to computer algorithms, physical systems experience higher noise that might
alter how they learn in response to external stimuli (107). Noise can aﬀect both the physical
response s(f) to stimuli f and the consequent change in learning d.o.f wi.
Such inevitable ﬂuctuations in physical systems can be a blessing since several learning
tasks require randomness. For example, molecular systems with ﬁnite numbers of molecules
can naturally act as ‘chemical Boltzmann machines’ needed for the unsupervised learning
of probability distributions (66). Similarly, Ref. (57) shows how the intrinsically stochastic
nature of nucleation of crystals can solve complex pattern recognition problems, much the
way stochastic local search algorithms solve satisﬁability problems on a computer. Noise
improves the robustness of encoded memories in disordered jammed packings (108). Noise
during physical training might also be beneﬁcial for generalization, as often found with
stochastic gradient descent in in silico ML (109). The physical learning rules discussed
earlier have been shown to be generally robust to noise, with an error ﬂoor (27, 100).
Potential mitigation strategies include modulating the learning rate and the magnitude of
stimuli during training (Fig. 5A).
The distributed nature of physical learning also intrinsically makes it robust to other
noise sources, like malfunctioning learning elements or damage. Similarly, unlike in silico
ML, physical learning is generally asynchronous since diﬀerent learning d.o.f wi are updated
independently without a central clocked processor, which might be beneﬁcial for discrete
learning d.o.f (28).
4.4. Material constraints: dynamic range of weights w, over-training
A signiﬁcant constraint on learning is the dynamic range of the learning d.o.f w achievable in
real materials without other compromises. For example, interactions in molecular systems
can vary over a ﬁnite range (relative to kBT) before associations become irreversible. Sim-
ilarly, in mechanical systems, the range of bond stiﬀnesses might be limited, e.g., to avoid
fracture. Such constraints might be overcome to some extent by choice of materials, such
as shape memory polymers (110, 111), hydrogels and poly-carbonates (112, 113). Existing
works (3, 6, 100) have found that requirements for tasks studied so far are within experi-
Learning without neurons in physical systems
15


mentally available ranges. Another solution is through architecture - e.g., larger networks
with more learning elements, each having a moderate dynamic range, might alleviate the
need for larger dynamic ranges.
Some learning d.o.f wi, such as stiﬀnesses, are constrained to be positive, an issue dis-
cussed before for the brain (114). Solutions proposed in ML, like shifting the task to positive
values (115), or decomposing negative weights as the diﬀerence of two positive weights (116),
might have physical analogs as well. For example, positive molecular binding energies can
be eﬀectively shifted to negative values by adjusting entropic costs of binding (3).
Another failure mode for learning physical systems is overtraining (6, 117). In materials
that lose the variability of the learning d.o.f, overtraining can result in a network that can
no longer adapt to new tasks (118).
5. PHYSICAL MANIFESTATIONS OF LEARNING CONCEPTS
5.1. Memory, learning and generalization
A closely related concept to learning is memory. In the materials context, memory has a
longer history of research, especially in disordered mechanical systems, polymer melts and
glasses (21). Examples include colloidal systems ‘remembering’ the amplitude of prior shear
and glasses ‘remembering’ a temperature at which they were aged.
What is the relationship between learning and memory? On one hand, memory is a
manifest requirement for learning; the learning d.o.f wi must encode a memory of past
stimuli f. On the other hand, successful learning places additional demands on the nature
of memory. Learning requires that the memory have a speciﬁc physical retrieval mechanism,
namely in response to stimuli for which a functional response is sought. Further, learning
often allows physical systems to generalize and show the correct response to stimuli never
seen before (3, 4, 6, 7, 47), much the way an in silico neural network can generalize to novel
cat images in a test set not seen during training. Such generalization requires selective
memory for informative features in the stimuli; complete memory of all features of the
training stimuli (over-ﬁtting) would be counter-productive. In summary, learning requires
selective and functional memory with a retrieval mechanism.
5.2. Learning out of equilibrium
Any learning process is associated with two distinct timescales: (1) a response timescale
τresponse associated with the physical d.o.f responding to stimuli f, i.e., mapping inputs to
outputs f →s(f, {w}), and (2) a learning timescale τlearn associated with updating the
learning d.o.f wi based on the response, i.e., dwi/dt ∼
1
τlearn g(s(f, {w})). In silico ML has
a clear separation between these timescales as the ﬁrst process is typically fully completed
before weights are updated.
In contrast, physical and biological systems might not have a clean separation between
τlearn and τresponse; learning might eﬀectively occur out-of-equilibrium and not be separable
from the physical dynamics of stimuli-response. However, learning can be successful despite
the lack of separation of timescales, as investigated for neuronal networks (119, 120, 121,
122) and tested recently for physical learning with contrastive rules (100). Even learning
rates comparable to the physical response rate (τlearn ∼τresponse) have little eﬀect on the
trained performance, though higher rates might lead to oscillations (Fig. 5B).
16
Stern and Murugan


(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
- 1.2
- 1.0
- 0.8
- 0.6
- 0.4
- 0.2
0.0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Error-time performance bound
Minimal error 
0
-
r
r
Learning rate
Learning rate
Molecular
species
Learning rate
Noise amplitude
Clamping amplitude
Stored states m
Critical load mc
Figure 5
Constraints on physical learning. (A) Noise in either the evaluation of the physical or learning
d.o.f can impede learning, yet it can be mitigated by controlling physical hyper-parameters like
the amplitude of clamping correction η, or the eﬀective learning rate α (7). (B) Physical learning
can succeed beyond physical equilibrium with minor eﬀect as long as the learning rate does not
exceed the physical dynamical rate R = 1. Far beyond equilibrium, under-damped learning
oscillations appear, yet the system might still be able to learn (100). (C) Speed-accuracy trade-oﬀ
in molecular systems trained to recognize patterns in molecular concentrations (57); higher
temperatures lead to higher accuracy and higher complexity of patterns recognized but come at a
price of slower computation through nucleation and growth. (D) Learning capacity scales as the
square root of the number of distinct molecular species for 2-dim molecular self-assembly (3).
5.3. Out of equilibrium eﬀects: Time reversal symmetry, steady states,
non-reciprocal interactions
Beyond the relative rate of learning and physical dynamics discussed above, there are two
distinct notions of being out-of-equilibrium relevant for learning: (a) the non-equilibrium
nature of the learning process, (b) the non-equilibrium nature of the underlying physical
system (in the absence of learning).
(a) The learning process: Successful learning is almost always out-of-equilibrium since it
is irreversible; learning starts with a random set of learning d.o.f and ends with a distinct set
of learning d.o.f wi from which it is likely impossible to reconstruct the initial wi exactly. As
Landauer pointed out (123), such a many-to-one procedure in the space of weights wi can
be interpreted as erasure and must consume free energy. Currently, it is unclear exactly how
many-to-one this process is for diﬀerent materials and tasks. At a more practical level, the
learning process is bound to be dissipative in nature. For example, the molecular versions
might involve polymerization, ligation or strand displacement (65, 51, 54) while mechanical
systems involve dissipative re-arrangements in foams and other complex materials (5). The
theoretical and practical constraints on learning by dissipation deserve further study.
(b) The underlying physical system can be characterized as being at equilibrium or
not without accounting for the learning process itself; many open questions remain on the
distinction between the two cases. For example, equilibrium systems with time-reversal
symmetry can typically avail of more highly supervised protocols such as the contrastive
Learning without neurons in physical systems
17


Hebbian rule and echo backpropagation (96, 101). Some of the systems studied here - e.g.,
elastic and ﬂow networks - are often studied at steady state and preserve time-reversal
symmetry. Consequently, inﬂuences can propagate from output to input as easily as input
to output, enabling contrastive learning (Eq. 7). In systems without time-reversal symmetry
- e.g., molecular systems that are not at steady state or are powered by molecular motors,
a perturbation of the output may not aﬀect the input. Such systems can still be trained in
an unsupervised way or through the thumbs-up-thumbs-down supervision described earlier.
On the other hand, relaxing the constraint of being at equilibrium could potentially
help learning. For example, the capacity of pattern recognition tasks in molecular systems
may be improved using non-equilibrium nucleation-dominated self-assembly (57) and show
associated trade-oﬀs between complexity of pattern recognition, accuracy and speed of
recognition (Fig. 5C). Similarly, non-reciprocal interactions (124) should increase the range
of learnable behaviors; for example, dynamic phases in Kuramoto-like networks of coupled
oscillators could potentially be learned (125). An open question is whether non-equilibrium
behaviors are also more learnable; e.g., these systems may be more expressive (94) or show
greater degeneracy of parameters for a given behavior.
5.4. Dynamic architectures, continual learning and forgetting
Neural networks often have a ﬁxed architecture (e.g., 2d convolutional network) with learn-
ing merely updating synaptic weights within that architecture. While some solid-state phys-
ical systems might be similarly constrained, physical systems that learn through growth
or molecular interactions, have a freedom in architecture not usually present in in silico
ML. For example, growing networks of nanotubes or grown gels (62, 91) or learned self-
assembly (3) can change topology, geometry and even dimensionality during training. It is
possible that learning can construct networks with architectures compatible to performing
desired tasks.
Further, physical systems naturally ‘forget’ learned experiences, e.g., through degrada-
tion. Such erasure and forgetting can allow physical systems to naturally learn new tasks
or functions without exceeding any capacity set by the number of d.o.f (4, 126).
5.5. Expressivity, capacity, and hidden nodes
A key property of any learning system is its ‘expressivity’, i.e., the complexity of input-
output relationships that can be modeled with the available learning d.o.f (127). A system
with higher expressivity might also be easier to train. In fact, the success of ML is often
attributed to overparameterization (128). A related quantiﬁcation is ‘capacity’ (58, 129),
e.g., related to the largest number of distinct behaviors that can be learned simultaneously.
As found for neural networks, both expressivity and capacity increase with the num-
ber of d.o.f for physical learning (3) (Fig. 5D). Work in speciﬁc systems like learned self-
assembly (3, 57, 130) shows that frustrated interactions and dimensionality of these d.o.f
can dramatically increase expressivity and capacity. However, we do not yet have broad
principles for controls expressivity are and what kinds of physical interactions increase it.
Another way to increase expressivity and capacity is the introduction of hidden nodes
that do not directly couple to input stimuli or the output behavior, as in restricted Boltz-
mann machines (97). In the materials context, similar ideas might apply, e.g., applying
force patterns to only boundary and not the bulk (131, 132) or mapping inputs only to
some molecules (47, 57), might allow learning of more complex behaviors.
18
Stern and Murugan


0
20
40
60
Epoch
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
Normalized stiffness
Untrained sheet
homogeneous
 stiffness
heterogeneous
stiffness
Trained sheet
Optimal Training
(A)
(B)
(D)
(C)
Eigenvalue
Task
Figure 6
Learning creates physical signatures in the substrate beyond the desired functionality. (A)
Learning induces spatial heterogeneity in the physical substrate, here a self-folding sheet with stiﬀ
creases (6). (B) System connectivity and topology may signiﬁcantly change, as learning eﬀectively
prunes many unused or counterproductive edges in a network (7). (C) Physical learning creates
soft modes in a system, so that most forces couple preferentially to these few modes, reducing the
eﬀective response dimension D of the system. (D) Depending on the diﬃculty of the task, a
learning system may trade oﬀperformance for energy. Here, a regression task performed by a ﬂow
network shows such a trade-oﬀwhen a parameter r that regulates power consumption is varied.
6. PHYSICAL SIGNATURES OF PAST LEARNING
Physical learning leads to disorder as the learning d.o.f wi typically become heterogeneous
during learning. However, while the usual approach to disordered systems averages over
random ensembles (133), the learning process can lead to atypical instances of disorder.
Here we discuss some signatures of learning in physical systems.
We note that many of these learning signatures are analogous to signatures of evolution
and evolvability (134). In both cases, functional systems are arrived at through an iterative
procedure in parameter space wi. Hence learning (and evolved) systems may be highly
atypical in the context of ‘random’ ensembles typically studied in statistical physics; instead,
these systems occupy functional regions accessible by the dynamical learning process. The
requirement of accessibility results in features that may be incidental or irrelevant to the
task being trained or selected for; such features would not be present in random systems
or systems designed by a highly non-local algorithm in parameter space. Much like with
evolution, these signatures can be used to examine if a natural disordered system is the
product of physical learning.
Learning without neurons in physical systems
19


6.1. Network geometry and topology
Heterogeneities: In solid-state systems such as elastic or ﬂow networks, a learning process
can leave profound signatures on the real space architecture. For example, like with synaptic
weights in a neural network, learning inevitably leads to spatial heterogeneity in local elastic
moduli or tube radii (Fig. 6A), up to complete pruning of unused edges (Fig. 6B). In
liquid-state systems, the learning process can create atypical patterns of heterogeneous and
promiscuous molecular interactions in chemical space; while a naive analysis might suggest
a lack of function due to non-speciﬁcity (135, 136), the learned interactions are actually
structured so as to be functional as seen in learned and evolved systems (3, 137). Studying
learning in relatively simple physical models may oﬀer new insights on when and why
such atypical heterogeneities develop, including potentially network motifs or hierarchical
structures found in natural networks (15, 138, 139).
Adaptability: Systems alternately trained for multiple incompatible behaviors in an
alternating sequence can discover rare but highly adaptive or ‘mutable’ networks for each
task (140, 141, 142, 143); such adaptive networks are able to switch from one behavior to
another with far fewer changes in parameters wi than would be typical for generic designed
networks that perform those tasks.
6.2. Network dynamics
Not-so-glassy landscapes: Generic frustrated many-body systems tend to have glassy
landscapes with many randomly placed minima. However, learning can lead to exponen-
tially fewer minima that are not randomly placed. For example, when molecular interactions
are learned in a Hebbian way to self-assemble one of many structures, the number of result-
ing minima is exponentially fewer than naively expected (3). Further, when the number
of minima do proliferate near capacity, they are not random; rather, they correspond to
chimeric assemblies of structures at other minima, analogous to spurious states in Hopﬁeld
associative memory. Similarly, jammed packings (41) can become ultra-stable by aging in
that state while disordered creased sheets (6, 43, 44, 144), upon training, show exponentially
fewer branches at the ﬂat state bifurcation point than expected of a random system.
Soft modes: Trained systems often show ‘soft’ modes even if training did not explicitly
seek such softness (16, 17, 145, 146). Soft modes correspond to normal modes with low
energy eigenvalue in equilibrium systems, or more generally, a small Lyapunov exponent.
Consequently, trained systems respond more strongly to random forces than a random
system; responses to random forces are often low dimensional along these soft modes (147,
148) (Fig. 6C). Furthermore, the energy required in ﬂow and resistor networks to actuate
desired behaviors is often reduced by supervised learning (Fig. 6D).
7. CONCLUSION
In this review we discussed the general notions of autonomous physical learning machines,
the physical constraints that aﬀect them, and how some of them can be overcome. While
clearly inspired by neuroscience and machine learning, we attempted to convey that physi-
cal learning is separate and unique: learning machines are physical, like biological learning
networks, but can learn to solve inverse problems and produce responses that have no anal-
ogy in biology or machine learning. Moreover, treating learning as a physical phenomenon
encourages research on fundamental questions on physically realizable learning models, how
20
Stern and Murugan


learning manifests as a collective behavior in systems with simple constituents, and how
learning induces physical changes in these systems. We believe that such questions underlie
a fundamental physical theory of learning, and that their answers may be independent of
the speciﬁc details of implementation of the learning machine. Physical learning, both the-
oretical and especially experimental, requires multidisciplinary approaches. We hope recent
and upcoming research in this ﬁeld will interest not only condensed matter physicists, but
computer scientists and neuroscientists as well.
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The authors are not aware of any aﬃliations, memberships, funding, or ﬁnancial holdings
that might be perceived as aﬀecting the objectivity of this review.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Sam Dillavou, Constantine Evans, Martin Falk, Nidhi Pashine, Lulu Qian, Daniel
Hexner, Shahar Yosha, Benjamin Scellier, Jason Rocks, Sid Nagel, Andrea Liu, Douglas
Durian, Heinrich Jaeger and Erik Winfree for insightful discussions and suggestions. M. S.
would like to acknowledge funding from the National Science Foundation via grant DMR-
2005749 and from the National Institute of Health CRCNS via grant 1R01MH125544-01.
This work was primarily supported by the University of Chicago Materials Research Science
and Engineering Center, which is funded by National Science Foundation under award
number DMR-2011854.
LITERATURE CITED
1. De Vito E, Rosasco L, Caponnetto A, De Giovannini U, Odone F, Bartlett P. 2005. Journal
of Machine Learning Research 6(5)
2. Hebb DO. 2005. The organization of behavior: A neuropsychological theory. Psychology Press
3. Murugan A, Zeravcic Z, Brenner MP, Leibler S. 2015. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences 112(1):54–59
4. Stern M, Pinson MB, Murugan A. 2020. Physical Review X 10(3):031044
5. Pashine N, Hexner D, Liu AJ, Nagel SR. 2019. Science Advances 5(12):eaax4215
6. Stern M, Arinze C, Perez L, Palmer SE, Murugan A. 2020. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 117(26):14843–14850
7. Stern M, Hexner D, Rocks JW, Liu AJ. 2021. Physical Review X 11(2):021045
8. Pedretti G, Milo V, Ambrogio S, Carboni R, Bianchi S, et al. 2017. Scientiﬁc reports 7(1):1–10
9. Micali G, Endres RG. 2016. Current opinion in microbiology 30:8–15
10. Bull MS, Prakash VN, Prakash M. 2021. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.02934
11. Marbach S, Ziethen N, Bastin L, Baeuerle F, Alim K. 2021. bioRxiv
12. Ristroph L, Ristroph G, Morozova S, Bergou AJ, Chang S, et al. 2013. Journal of The Royal
Society Interface 10(85):20130237
13. Peleg O, Peters JM, Salcedo MK, Mahadevan L. 2018. Nature Physics 14(12):1193–1198
14. Braitenberg V. 1986. Vehicles: Experiments in synthetic psychology. MIT press
15. Kanai R, Komura Y, Shipp S, Friston K. 2015. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society
B: Biological Sciences 370(1668):20140169
16. Tlusty T, Libchaber A, Eckmann JP. 2017. Physical Review X 7(2):021037
17. Husain K, Murugan A. 2020. Molecular Biology and Evolution 37(10):2865–2874
18. Wang Y, Chen M, Zhou F, Ma E. 2002. nature 419(6910):912–915
Learning without neurons in physical systems
21


19. Karbasian H, Tekkaya AE. 2010. Journal of Materials Processing Technology 210(15):2103–
2118
20. Baird DG, Collias DI. 2014. Polymer processing: principles and design. John Wiley & Sons
21. Keim NC, Paulsen JD, Zeravcic Z, Sastry S, Nagel SR. 2019. Reviews of Modern Physics
91(3):035002
22. Lillicrap TP, Santoro A, Marris L, Akerman CJ, Hinton G. 2020. Nature Reviews Neuroscience
21(6):335–346
23. Nemenman I. 2005. Neural computation 17(9):2006–2033
24. Caporale N, Dan Y. 2008. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 31:25–46
25. Bengio Y, Lee DH, Bornschein J, Mesnard T, Lin Z. 2015. arXiv preprint arXiv:1502.04156
26. Scellier B. 2021. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.09985
27. Dillavou S, Stern M, Liu AJ, Durian DJ. 2021. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.00275
28. WycoﬀJF, Dillavou S, Stern M, Liu AJ, Durian DJ. 2022. The Journal of Chemical Physics
156(14):144903
29. Burr GW, Shelby RM, Sebastian A, Kim S, Kim S, et al. 2017. Advances in Physics: X
2(1):89–124
30. Markovi´c D, Mizrahi A, Querlioz D, Grollier J. 2020. Nature Reviews Physics 2(9):499–510
31. Piccinini G. 2015. Physical computation: A mechanistic account. OUP Oxford
32. Adleman LM. 1994. science 266(5187):1021–1024
33. Soloveichik D, Cook M, Winfree E, Bruck J. 2008. natural computing 7(4):615–633
34. Tanaka G, Yamane T, H´eroux JB, Nakane R, Kanazawa N, et al. 2019. Neural Networks
115:100–123
35. Jaeger H, Haas H. 2004. Science 304(5667):78–80
36. Silverberg JL, Evans AA, McLeod L, Hayward RC, Hull T, et al. 2014. science 345(6197):647–
650
37. Bertoldi K, Vitelli V, Christensen J, Van Hecke M. 2017. Nature Reviews Materials 2(11):1–11
38. Rocks JW, Pashine N, Bischofberger I, Goodrich CP, Liu AJ, Nagel SR. 2017. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences 114(10):2520–2525
39. Hexner D, Pashine N, Liu AJ, Nagel SR. 2020. Physical Review Research 2(4):043231
40. Hexner D, Liu AJ, Nagel SR. 2020. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
117(50):31690–31695
41. Hagh VF, Nagel SR, Liu AJ, Manning ML, Corwin EI. 2022. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 119(19):e2117622119
42. Dudte LH, Vouga E, Tachi T, Mahadevan L. 2016. Nature materials 15(5):583–588
43. Stern M, Jayaram V, Murugan A. 2018. Nature communications 9(1):1–8
44. Stern M, Pinson MB, Murugan A. 2017. Physical Review X 7(4):041070
45. Bray D. 1995. Nature 376(6538):307–312
46. Winfree E. 1998. Algorithmic self-assembly of dna. California Institute of Technology
47. Cherry KM, Qian L. 2018. Nature 559(7714):370–376
48. Zeravcic Z, Manoharan VN, Brenner MP. 2017. Reviews of Modern Physics 89(3):031001
49. BiﬃS, Cerbino R, Bomboi F, Paraboschi EM, Asselta R, et al. 2013. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 110(39):15633–15637
50. Needleman D, Dogic Z. 2017. Nature reviews materials 2(9):1–14
51. Schaus TE, Woo S, Xuan F, Chen X, Yin P. 2017. Nature communications 8(1):1–9
52. Fredriksson S, Gullberg M, Jarvius J, Olsson C, Pietras K, et al. 2002. Nature biotechnology
20(5):473–477
53. Lee JH, Lee SH, Baek C, Chun H, Ryu Jh, et al. 2017. Biosystems 158:1–9
54. Baek C, Lee SW, Lee BJ, Kwak DH, Zhang BT. 2019. Molecules 24(7):1409
55. Baum EB. 1995. Science 268(5210):583–585
56. Mills AP, Yurke B, Platzman PM. 1999. Biosystems 52(1):175–180
57. Zhong W, Schwab DJ, Murugan A. 2017. Journal of Statistical Physics 167(3):806–826
22
Stern and Murugan


58. Hopﬁeld JJ. 1982. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences 79(8):2554–2558
59. Jacobs WM. 2021. Physical review letters 126(25):258101
60. Shrinivas K, Brenner MP. 2021. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 118(45)
61. Lee JB, Peng S, Yang D, Roh YH, Funabashi H, et al. 2012. Nature nanotechnology 7(12):816–
820
62. Mohammed AM, ˇSulc P, Zenk J, Schulman R. 2017. Nat. Nanotechnol. 12(4):312–316
63. Schulman R, Yurke B, Winfree E. 2012. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences
109(17):6405–6410
64. Gandhi N, Ashkenasy G, Tannenbaum E. 2007. Journal of theoretical biology 249(1):58–66
65. Lakin MR, Stefanovic D. 2016. ACS Synthetic Biology 5(8):885–897
66. Poole W, Ortiz-Munoz A, Behera A, Jones NS, Ouldridge TE, et al. 2017. In International
Conference on DNA-Based Computers. Springer
67. Tayar AM, Hagan MF, Dogic Z. 2021. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
118(30)
68. Saha S, Nagy TL, Weiner OD. 2018. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Bio-
logical Sciences 373(1747):20170145
69. Majumdar S, Foucard LC, Levine AJ, Gardel ML. 2018. Soft matter 14(11):2052–2058
70. Li S, Batra R, Brown D, Chang HD, Ranganathan N, et al. 2019. Nature 567(7748):361–365
71. Cichos F, Gustavsson K, Mehlig B, Volpe G. 2020. Nature Machine Intelligence 2(2):94–103
72. Falk MJ, Alizadehyazdi V, Jaeger H, Murugan A. 2021. Physical Review Research 3(3):033291
73. Rubenstein M, Cornejo A, Nagpal R. 2014. Science 345(6198):795–799
74. Werfel J, Petersen K, Nagpal R. 2014. Science 343(6172):754–758
75. Banerjee S, Gardel ML, Schwarz US. 2020. Annual review of condensed matter physics 11:421–
439
76. Kramar M, Alim K. 2021. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 118(10)
77. Lin X, Rivenson Y, Yardimci NT, Veli M, Luo Y, et al. 2018. Science 361(6406):1004–1008
78. Wright LG, Onodera T, Stein MM, Wang T, Schachter DT, et al. 2022. Nature 601(7894):549–
555
79. Tero A, Takagi S, Saigusa T, Ito K, Bebber DP, et al. 2010. Science 327(5964):439–442
80. Katifori E, Sz¨oll˝osi GJ, Magnasco MO. 2010. Physical review letters 104(4):048704
81. Ronellenﬁtsch H, Katifori E. 2016. Physical review letters 117(13):138301
82. Anisetti VR, Scellier B, Schwarz JM. 2022. arXiv preprint arXiv:220.312098
83. Kim KH, Gaba S, Wheeler D, Cruz-Albrecht JM, Hussain T, et al. 2012. Nano letters
12(1):389–395
84. Grollier J, Querlioz D, Camsari K, Everschor-Sitte K, Fukami S, Stiles MD. 2020. Nature
electronics 3(7):360–370
85. Rosenthal E, Greshnikov S, Soudry D, Kvatinsky S. 2016. In 2016 IEEE international sym-
posium on circuits and systems (ISCAS). IEEE
86. Serrano-Gotarredona T, Masquelier T, Prodromakis T, Indiveri G, Linares-Barranco B. 2013.
Frontiers in neuroscience 7:2
87. Kendall J, Pantone R, Manickavasagam K, Bengio Y, Scellier B. 2020. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2006.01981
88. Martin E, Ernoult M, Laydevant J, Li S, Querlioz D, et al. 2021. Iscience 24(3):102222
89. Sui X, Wu Q, Liu J, Chen Q, Gu G. 2020. IEEE Access 8:70773–70783
90. Rajendran B, Sebastian A, Schmuker M, Srinivasa N, Eleftheriou E. 2019. IEEE Signal Pro-
cessing Magazine 36(6):97–110
91. Agrawal DK, Jiang R, Reinhart S, Mohammed AM, Jorgenson TD, Schulman R. 2017. ACS
nano 11(10):9770–9779
92. Pashine N. 2021. Physical Review Materials 5(6):065607
93. Cheng Z, R´ıos C, Pernice WH, Wright CD, Bhaskaran H. 2017. Science advances 3(9):e1700160
94. Bisker G, England JL. 2018. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 115(45):E10531–
Learning without neurons in physical systems
23


E10538
95. Fisher RA. 1936. Annals of eugenics 7(2):179–188
96. Movellan JR. 1991. In Connectionist models. Elsevier, 10–17
97. Hinton GE, Osindero S, Teh YW. 2006. Neural computation 18(7):1527–1554
98. Bengio Y, Fischer A, Mesnard T, Zhang S, Wu Y. 2015. In Deep Learning Workshop, Inter-
national Conference on Machine Learning (ICML)
99. Scellier B, Bengio Y. 2017. Frontiers in computational neuroscience 11:24
100. Stern M, Dillavou S, Miskin MZ, Durian DJ, Liu AJ. 2022. Phys. Rev. Research 4(2):L022037
101. Lopez-Pastor V, Marquardt F. 2021. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.04992
102. Scellier B, Goyal A, Binas J, Mesnard T, Bengio Y. 2018. arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.04873
103. Kim S, Du C, Sheridan P, Ma W, Choi S, Lu WD. 2015. Nano letters 15(3):2203–2211
104. Serb A, Bill J, Khiat A, Berdan R, Legenstein R, Prodromakis T. 2016. Nature communications
7(1):1–9
105. Bernstein J, Wang YX, Azizzadenesheli K, Anandkumar A. 2018. In International Conference
on Machine Learning. PMLR
106. Murugan A, Zou J, Brenner MP. 2015. Nature communications 6(1):1–10
107. Ventriglia F, Di Maio V. 2002. Biosystems 67(1-3):287–294
108. Keim NC, Nagel SR. 2011. Physical review letters 107(1):010603
109. Bottou L. 2003. In Summer School on Machine Learning. Springer
110. McKnight G, Henry C. 2005. In Smart Structures and Materials 2005: Active Materials:
Behavior and Mechanics, vol. 5761. International Society for Optics and Photonics
111. Lagoudas DC. 2008. Shape memory alloys: modeling and engineering applications. Springer
112. Henke M, Gerlach G. 2014. Microsystem technologies 20(4-5):599–606
113. Zhou Y, Duque CM, Santangelo CD, Hayward RC. 2019. Advanced Functional Materials
29(48):1905273
114. Sorscher B, Mel G, Ganguli S, Ocko S. 2019. Advances in neural information processing
systems 32
115. Hu M, Strachan JP, Li Z, Grafals EM, Davila N, et al. 2016. In 2016 53nd ACM/EDAC/IEEE
Design Automation Conference (DAC). IEEE
116. Wang Z, Li C, Song W, Rao M, Belkin D, et al. 2019. Nature electronics 2(3):115–124
117. Amari Si, Murata N, M¨uller KR, Finke M, Yang H. 1995. Advances in neural information
processing systems 8
118. Hexner D. 2022. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.03468
119. Zucker RS, Regehr WG. 2002. Annual review of physiology 64(1):355–405
120. Marom S. 2010. Progress in neurobiology 90(1):16–28
121. Ernoult M, Grollier J, Querlioz D, Bengio Y, Scellier B. 2019. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 32:7081–7091
122. Bartunov S, Santoro A, Richards B, Marris L, Hinton GE, Lillicrap T. 2018. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems
123. Landauer R. 1961. IBM journal of research and development 5(3):183–191
124. Fruchart M, Hanai R, Littlewood PB, Vitelli V. 2021. Nature 592(7854):363–369
125. Seliger P, Young SC, Tsimring LS. 2002. Physical Review E 65(4):041906
126. French RM. 1999. Trends in cognitive sciences 3(4):128–135
127. Bahri Y, Kadmon J, Pennington J, Schoenholz SS, Sohl-Dickstein J, Ganguli S. 2020. Annual
Review of Condensed Matter Physics 11:501–528
128. Rocks JW, Mehta P. 2022. Physical Review Research 4(1):013201
129. Hertz J, Krogh A, Palmer RG. 2018. Introduction to the theory of neural computation. CRC
Press
130. Fink TM, Ball RC. 2001. Physical review letters 87(19):198103
131. Coulais C, Teomy E, De Reus K, Shokef Y, Van Hecke M. 2016. Nature 535(7613):529–532
132. Pinson MB, Witten TA. 2016. Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 28(49):495102
24
Stern and Murugan


133. M´ezard M, Parisi G, Virasoro MA. 1987. Spin glass theory and beyond: An introduction to
the replica method and its applications. vol. 9. World Scientiﬁc Publishing Company
134. Wagner GP, Altenberg L. 1996. Evolution 50(3):967–976
135. Johnson ME, Hummer G. 2011. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108(2):603–
608
136. Huntley MH, Murugan A, Brenner MP. 2016. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
113(21):5841–5846
137. Su CJ, Murugan A, Linton JM, Yeluri A, Bois J, et al. 2022. Cell Systems
138. Alon U. 2007. Nature Reviews Genetics 8(6):450–461
139. Modes CD, Magnasco MO, Katifori E. 2016. Physical Review X 6(3):031009
140. Kashtan N, Alon U. 2005. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 102(39):13773–
13778
141. Hemery M, Rivoire O. 2015. Physical review E 91(4):042704
142. Bloom JD, Labthavikul ST, Otey CR, Arnold FH. 2006. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences 103(15):5869–5874
143. Murugan A, Jaeger HM. 2019. MRS Bulletin 44(2):96–105
144. Pinson MB, Stern M, Carruthers Ferrero A, Witten TA, Chen E, Murugan A. 2017. Nature
communications 8(1):1–8
145. Yan L, Ravasio R, Brito C, Wyart M. 2018. Biophysical journal 114(12):2787–2798
146. Recanatesi S, Farrell M, Lajoie G, Deneve S, Rigotti M, Shea-Brown E. 2021. Nature commu-
nications 12(1):1–13
147. Kaneko K, Tsuda I. 2003. Chaos:
An Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Science
13(3):926–936
148. Transtrum MK, Machta BB, Brown KS, Daniels BC, Myers CR, Sethna JP. 2015. The Journal
of chemical physics 143(1):07B201 1
Learning without neurons in physical systems
25
